Default Colors

Next, let’s discuss default or structural colors. Almost every site you design 
will incorporate black, white, and shades of gray in some way. These default 
colors are used often as the color for text within your designs, as they 
provide plenty of contrast for reading and can fit into many other different 
color schemes.

When selecting the color of your text, it’s important to ensure the contrast 
is high enough for the text to be legible. However, too much contrast can also 
be an issue.

Pure black on white can be hard on the user’s eyes because of the stark 
contrast. Using a darker gray for text on a white background, or white text on 
a dark gray background, helps soften the feel while still providing clear enough 
contrast to be legible without issue.

Neutral Colors

It’s important to consider how contrast will also be affected when using 
different colors for backgrounds and text.

Neutral colors, or hues with low lightness and/or saturation, make for good 
base colors as it allows you to add flourishes to the parts of the site where 
you want to direct the user’s attention.

For example, similar to using a dark gray with white text, you can use a darker
shade of a color with light colored text. Using a medium shade or tint of 
a color can be difficult to achieve the same result, as the contrast is lower.


Whitespace

Space is an important aspect of creating balanced and harmonious layouts in web
design. As a designer, it’s important to understand how space can enhance as 
well as hurt your designs.

Whitespace, or negative space, refers to the emptiness between elements. It’s
not necessarily white in color, even though, that is sometimes the case.

For example, you will notice that Google embraces whitespace on its landing 
page. It focuses the user’s attention solely on the primary action, which is 
searching for content.

Too much whitespace can negatively impact the flow of your site. By including 
too much spacing in-between elements, it can cause issues for users trying to 
navigate seamlessly through the content.

As a designer, don’t fear using space to enhance the usability of your site 
and prioritize the most important content.


Accessibility

Making sure that the colors you choose for your UI components are accessible 
is a really important aspect of visual design.

Using contrasting colors will help users that need assistance understand and 
differentiate the content you have designed.

However, many users can experience different types of color blindness:

    red-green, where users have a difficult time differentiating between the 
red and green colors.
    blue-yellow, where the blues tend to appear greener
    monochromatic, when users can’t see color at all.

To make your sites more accessible, try pairing another indicator along with 
color to convey information. Earlier, we mentioned using green as a success 
indicator and red as an error alert indicator. Consider using a label indicator
such as a green check for success and a red “x” for error to ensure the user 
has a full understanding of the message.

If you are having trouble deciding on an accessible color palette you can visit 
Color Safe which creates accessible color palettes for your site or app based 
on Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG).

Already decided on colors? You can go to WebAIM Color Contrast Checker to test 
how your selected colors work with web usability.

As you can see in our example, we placed an icon next to the alert message 
to provide an additional visual cue for the user

Iterations

As a Visual UI designer, aesthetics are important to the overall user 
experience. However, if usability and aesthetics conflict, it’s always best
 to err on the side of usability.

Testing and iteration are essential parts of the user-centered design process.
Test early and test often is the motto of designers! No amount of design 
knowledge can replace putting your designs in front of users to gain appropriate 
and helpful feedback.

As some users are different from others, gaining a better understanding of 
who you are building for will help in ensuring the color choices work. So it’s 
important to understand that while you may fall in love with that shade of 
blue, you should be prepared to change your color choices based on the feedback 
you receive.
