Color Theory
The Color Wheel and HSLA

There are a few different options for setting colors in CSS that we covered in 
Learn CSS: Color. Take a look at the code below to refresh yourself on the 
different ways of setting color in CSS.

h1 {
    color: Yellow; /*Keyword */
}
h2 {
    color: #8FBC8F; /* Hex Code */
}
h3 {
    color: rgb(23, 45, 23); /* RGB*/
}
p {
    color: hsla(34, 100%, 50%, 0.1); /* HSLA*/
}

When thinking like a designer, HSLA is the preferred syntax for setting colors. Why?

    The CSS color keywords only give us a few options.
    Hex Codes and RGB values cannot be intuitively adjusted. For example, you get 
feedback on your design that one color needs to be a little brighter, that does not 
translate to intuitive changes within Hexadecimal codes or RGB values.
    HSLA is the most semantic system of setting colors with CSS.

Let’s review what each value means:

    The “pure” color is set with the Hue. This is expressed as the angle in degrees 
around the color wheel.
    Saturation refers to the intensity or purity of that hue. Colors with full 
saturation (100%) are the color itself, colors with no saturation (0%) are 
completely grayscale.
    Lightness refers to the lightness of the color. 0% is black, 100% is white.
    A, or alpha, refers to the opacity. 0% is fully transparent, 100% is fully opaque.

Using values that have semantic meaning gives the designer more direct control over 
the color scheme, and more direct ability to manage contrast and create related 
color schemes.

Warm Colors

All colors have a warmth value assigned to them, which can be classified as 
warm or cool.

Warm colors range between red and yellow, which include various versions of 
those colors in addition to orange. This also comprises colors such as brown 
and tan. These are considered to be “warm” colors in that they evoke a sense 
of warmth. For instance, fire is associated with warmth, and it typically burns 
between the spectrum of reds and yellows. Warm colors can also promote a feeling 
of aggression and are considered bold

Cool Colors

On the other side of the color wheel in contrast to warm colors, there are 
colors that are considered to be “cool”. These colors range between blue, 
purple and green. Most gray colors fall into the cool category as well.

Cool colors are given this designation because of their calming, soothing nature. 
They’re often associated with winter climates or water.

Tints and Shades

You can also increase and decrease the lightness of a color, resulting in tints 
and shades of a hue, respectively.

Tints occur when white is applied to a color, adding or increasing the lightness 
of a hue.

Shades are created when black is added to a color, which decreases the lightness 
of a hue.

In HSLA, tints and shades are determined by the third number, which is L for 
lightness. This starts at 0% (black) and ranges to 100% (white).

Understanding how to use tints and shades of a color can help in creating a 
wider range of colors you could apply to your websites.

Color Contrast

Color contrast plays a major role in design as well. Colors opposite of each 
other on the color wheel tend to have a higher contrast. Colors that fall next 
to each other have a lower contrast to one another.

When applying color to your designs, it’s vital to ensure contrast levels provide 
clarity to the users for the elements on your page. For instance, you wouldn’t want 
to use a light color on a white background or a detailed background. It’s essential 
to try and increase the contrast of your designs in order to promote ease of use 
and legibility.

Color Psychology

Even though we’ve explored multiple possibilities in terms of selecting color 
schemes, when it comes down to choosing the right combinations, a designer 
must determine the “feel” of their website.

Every color has a different context and meaning, and color psychology can 
impact how people perceive a design and relate to the colors used. Choosing 
the right colors can help nonverbally communicate the context and emotion of a 
product or service.

Each color has a specific meaning (both positive and negative), which can evoke 
emotions from a user. For instance, here’s a list of words often associated with 
colors:

    Red: Passionate, energetic, angry
    Orange: Optimistic, playful, fun
    Yellow: Welcoming, intellectual, impatient
    Green: Prosperous, balanced, growing
    Blue: Peaceful, loyal, cold
    Purple: Imaginative, royal, spiritual
    Gray: Unemotional, compromising
    White: Innocent, pure
    Black: Luxurious, powerful

It’s also important to note that color associations may vary from other parts 
of the world as well. However, when selecting colors, be sure to choose ones 
that help reinforce the overall message and tone of the website!


This is also the reason why you often see dark gray or black text on a white 
background. The high contrast between the two colors provides the best ability 
for users to read the information without any difficulty.

Best Practices

Now that we’ve talked through how to choose the proper colors for your designs, 
there are some best practices to consider as well.

Use neon colors sparingly. While the use of neon colors can feel hip, they are 
often hard on a user’s eyes.

Avoid vibrating colors. Vibrating colors result from pairing two colors with 
high saturation together that may be complementary to one another. It creates a 
glowing or moving effect, which also can be hard on one’s eyes.

For example, the red and green pairing that is common with Christmas cards is 
very glaring when presented on a screen. See the example to the right to notice 
how intense and distracting this pairing feels.

Use backdrops to separate vibrating colors. In the example, the white backdrop 
behind the green card reduces the space where the contrasting colors (red and 
green) are directly next to each other, but the overall effect is still too 
intense for most websites.

Avoid color combinations with insufficient contrast, including:

    Bright colors on top of bright colors
    Light colors on top of light colors
    Dark colors on top of dark colors

Even if there’s enough contrast in these pairings for the different colors to be 
legible, they likely won’t create enough contrast to attract the user’s attention.

Remember that most users skim websites! They are not reading every word and 
checking every menu—you need to guide the user to the most important content 
with good color choices.
