Differentiating Text: HTML Headers

Accept it now, no user is ever going to read every sentence on your website. 
It’s your job as the designer to make sure the user can easily distinguish 
what they want to read and what they can skip. Differentiating important 
pieces of text, such as titles and subtitles, is an effective way of 
achieving this.

You can guide a user through your site by creating contrast with headings, 
subheading, and lists (ordered or unordered).

As a best practice, the following HTML elements are used to differentiate 
text into categories:

    <h1> — Used for titles.
        You should only have one header this style per page.
    <h2> — Used for headings.
        This should be to identify major sections you want the user to 
        immediately be drawn towards.
    <h3> — Used for subheadings.
        This should be used for smaller focal points, such as articles, that 
        you want the user to notice when scanning the page.


These tags will create a visual hierarchy that is very clear and familiar to 
your user (and therefore very learnable), and it will also stop you from 
writing paragraph after paragraph. Use HTML tags to remind yourself to be 
concise, and break things into lists and headings whenever possible.

Make sure that headings are closer to the content that they are introducing 
than the content that they come after. They do not provide clear visual 
organization if they are equidistant from both settings.


Differentiating Text: Fonts

Fonts also play a useful role in differentiating text when used sparingly. It 
is effective to have a different font for a page title, and perhaps a third 
font for certain subheaders. But be warned, if you differentiate each 
paragraph with a new font or have a different font for every level of header 
your page will quickly become muddled and hard to read.

It often works well to have most of your text in a serif font, and then 
create contrast with headings or subheadings in a sans-serif font, but this 
can vary based on how you’d like the page to be styled. The most important 
thing is that the fonts you have complement each other appropriately.

In addition to fonts and headers, you can contrast between different pieces 
of text in a number of ways:

    style
    size
    weight
    color

A good rule is that if you find yourself using more than three different 
fonts on one page, maybe it’s time to try fewer fonts but other sources of 
visual contrast with text.

Whitespace

The whitespace on your page is just as important to the text design of your 
site as the text itself. Without proper spacing and balance, your text can 
be rendered virtually illegible.

A website is like a room, the user needs to be able to move through it 
easily. And just like a room, it is important to keep it tidy and free of 
clutter. This is the power of whitespace. Good whitespace allows you to 
increase the legibility of your text, helps prevent users from skimming over 
elements, and serves as an unintrusive boundary between different sections 
of the page, without actually being there.

It’s just like standing in line at the store. You don’t want to be breathing 
down the neck of the person in front of you, it’s not comfortable for anyone! 
It’s the same with text, you don’t want your title crowded out by your 
subheaders, and you don’t want that paragraph invading the personal space of 
the nearby image.

Text Navigability

It’s also important for a user to immediately know how to navigate your text. 
It should be clear what they can click, and where it will take them.

    Stick to conventions about showing what is clickable (generally, links 
should be blue and underlined). Underlining links is less common now than a 
few years ago. It’s optional, but a nice courtesy to colorblind users.
    Never use blue as a general accent color for text, because your users 
will probably try to click on it no matter what.
    Having text on navigation buttons is important. It removes all uncertainty 
about what each button does.


Sticking to these simple rules will allow users to easily navigate your page 
and makes them more likely to stick around and experience the actual content 
of your site.

Also, it is important to think about the ways the user’s eyes will travel 
across your text. This will impact the way they navigate the page. If you 
organize the text into columns, the user’s eyes will likely not travel across 
the entire screen, they will travel to the end of a column and then down. 

F-Shaped Skimming

Notice that even leading long form magazines like the New Yorker have very 
visual landing pages. Every article has a photo or sketch associated with 
it, and rarely more than a one sentence preview. Users are happy to click 
through to get to the content they want, and they would prefer this to a 
cluttered homepage.

Take it a step further, look at the Amazon.com homepage. There is almost 
no text, and absolutely no full sentences(no periods in sight!) even though 
some of the headings have both a subject and a verb. When people are figuring 
out where to go on your site, they are just skimming to find what they want 
(even if what they want is a news article or a short story). You need to write 
and format your text with this skimmer in mind.

Recall the article from the previous unit, How Users Scan. Users will scan 
content on the left of the screen before the right of the screen, and the top 
of the screen before the bottom of the screen. Our eyes jump back to the left 
of the screen whenever we finish reading a line. This creates an F pattern 
that the user’s eye follows, and is thus known as f-shaped skimming.

Side note: This is only true for languages that are read left to right: 
reverse it if you are designing a site that will be read in a language that 
goes right to left like Hebrew or Arabic